Mr. Morton,I will tell you, from this vantage point
it does look like the decision to release detainees was a political determination and not a monetary determination.
It appears to me that the release of detainees was part of a sequester campaign
that included the fictional firing of teachers, the closing of the White House,
for student tours, the displacement of meat inspectors, and now we're going to release aggravated felons, some aggravated felons on to the street
Now I've counted six times you have said that you didn't want to rob Peter to pay Paul.
I don't want Peter or Paul to rob one of our fellow citizens because you guessed wrong on who to release.
So, what is a level one violator?
A level one offender, .... first I obviously disagree with your characterization about these being political
Well, that's fine. You can use your time to disagree with my characterization, don't use mine.
What is a level one violator?
With regard to level one offenders, they are aggravated felons
And how many were released?
There are four presently
How many were released? Eight were released.
We have four presently
And, what went wrong with the other four?
What's that?
Why were there eight released and only four currently?
So, two were, uh, released when the computer records
were not correct, and we went back and looked at them, and we brought them back in.
One, um, was a mistake, and then ...
What kind of mistake?
Just where the instructions to the field were not carried out correctly
Alright, so, if it is $122 a day to house four level one aggravated felons,
Then releasing them saves you, what? About $600 a day?
Each day, that is right.
You can't find $600 anywhere else in your budget?
We make determinations on a case by case basis
Can you find $600 somewhere else in your budget?
The question is whether that $600 is well spent on
those people or someone else
And when it comes to somebody that has been a 44 year, lawful permanent...
I'm not talking about the 44 .... Was he a level one? Was he a level one?
Was he a level one? He is a level one offender
He was one of the four that you released?
No that . . . he is released, that's right.
Who made the decision to release detainees as part of your effort to comply with sequestration?
The determination was made by Mr. Meade,
the executive associate director for enforcement and removal operations
in consultation with the chief financial officer
Who is John Sandweg?
Mr. Sandweg works for the Secretary
Where there any conversations with him?
Not that I am aware of
Where there any conversations with the Secretary?
Not that I am aware of. I think that the Secretary has noted that
She was surprised in regard to the timing of the notification and I agree with that
If the release of aggravated felons does not rise to the level of something that the Secretary of Department of Homeland Security
should know about, what does rise to the level?
Uh, listen. We release people every day
and the idea that we are going to review
every single person that is released . . .
You release thousands of people every day?
We release thousands of people every month
we operate in a system, we had four hundred and...
But you don't blame it on sequestration, do you, Director Morton?
What's that?
You don't blame it on sequestration when you release the others
It's not part of this strategy to get the public fired up, that
mayhem is upon us. That we are closing the White House
for tours, that we're firing teachers in West Virginia
that we're going to have to release level one aggravated felons
because of sequestration
First of all, that was never said
And, the system allows for the release
on supervision, of people going through immigration proceedings
We are not detaining people for penal reasons
solely for the purposes of removal
As I've said, the vast majority of people in proceedings
by statutory design are not mandatory detention.
Who are level two violators?
They are either multiple misdemeanors
or felons that congress has defined as something
other than an aggravated felon.
A DUI would be a misdemeanor, right?
First offence? How about second offence?
Depends on state law.
How about the states where you release people?
Did you release any recidivist drunk drivers?
Uh, yes
How many?
I don't have the exact number
But we have released . . . many individuals
who have had DUI offences
Repeat offender DUI?
Repeat offender DUIs. Most of them were
single offenders, but some would be DUIs
I would note, for the record,
Mr. Gowdy, congress has not provided that a DUI
is a ground of removal.
In fact, most misdemeanors are not a ground of removal
It is the agency, by agency policy
that factors that in
I can't order you removed for having committed a DUI
No you can't, Director
but you certainly can request a programmatic
rescheduling so that you can move money around
And this notion that you don't want to
rob Peter to pay Paul. You could have easily
done that. You could have found $600.
to keep these level one violators from being released
and don't act like you could not have.